ENSEMBLE OF GENERATIVE AND DISCRIMINATIVE TECHNIQUES FOR SENTIMENT ANALYSIS OF MOVIE REVIEWS
Gr∩egoire Mesnil University of Montre∩al University of Rouen
Tomas Mikolov & Marc＊Aurelio Ranzato Facebook Arti?cial Intelligence Research
Yoshua Bengio University of Montre∩al
ABSTRACT
Sentiment analysis is a common task in natural language processing that aims to detect polarity of a text document (typically a consumer review). In the simplest settings, we discriminate only between positive and negative sentiment, turning the task into a standard binary classi?cation problem. We compare several machine learning approaches to this problem, and combine them to achieve a new state of the art. We show how to use for this task the standard generative language models, which are slightly complementaryto the state of the art techniques. We achieve strong results on a well-known dataset of IMDB movie reviews. Our results are easily reproducible, as we publish also the code needed to repeat the experiments. This should simplify further advance of the state of the art, as other researchers can combine their techniques with ours with little effort.
1 INTRODUCTION
Sentiment analysis is among the most popular, simple and useful tasks in natural language processing. It aims at predicting the attitude of text, typically a sentence or a review. For instance, movies or restaurant are often rated with a certain number of stars, which indicate the degree to which the reviewer was satis?ed.
This task is often considered as one of the simplest in NLP because basic machine learning techniques can yield strong baselines (Wang & Manning, 2012), often beating much more intricate approaches(Socher et al., 2011). In the simplest settings, this task can be seen as a binaryclassi?cation between positive and negative sentiment.
However, there are several challenges towards achieving the best possible accuracy. It is not obvious how to represent variable length documents beyond simple bag of words approaches that lose word order information. One can use advanced machine learning techniques such as recurrent neural networks and their variations (Mikolov et al., 2010; Socher et al., 2011), however it is not clear if these provide any signi?cant gain over simple bag-of-words and bag-of-ngram techniques (Pang & Lee, 2008; Wang & Manning, 2012).
In this work, we compared several different approaches and realized, without much surprise, that model combination performs better than any individual technique. The ensemble best bene?ts from models that are complementary, thus having diverse set of techniques is desirable. The vast majority of models proposed in the literature are discriminative in nature, as their parameters are tuned for the classi?cation task directly. In this work, we boost the performance of the ensemble by considering a generative language model. To this end, we train two language models, one on the positive reviews and one on the negative ones, and use the likelihood ratio of these two models
1
Accepted as a workshop contribution at ICLR 2015
evaluated on the test data as an additional feature. For example, we assume that a positive review will have higher likelihood to be generated by a model that was trained on a large set of positive reviews, and lower likelihood given the negative model. In this paper, we constrained our work to binary classi?cation where we trained two generative models, positive and negative. One could consider a higher number of classes since this approach scales linearily with the number of models to be train, i.e. one for each class. The large pool of diverse models is a) simple to implement (in line with previous work by Wang and Manning (Wang & Manning, 2012)) and b) it yields state of the art performance on one of the largest publicly available benchmarks of movie reviews, the Stanford IMDB dataset of reviews. Code to reproduce our experiments is available at https://github.com/mesnilgr/iclr15.
2 DESCRIPTION OF THE MODELS
In this section we describe in detail the approaches we considered in our study. The novelty of this paper consists in combining both generative and discriminative models together for sentiment prediciton.
2.1 GENERATIVE MODEL
A generative model de?nes a distribution over the input. By training a generative model for each class, we can then use Bayes rule to predict which class a test sample belongs to. More formally, given a dataset of pairs {x(i),y(i)}i=1,...,N where x(i) is the i-th document in the training set, y(i) ﹋ {?1,+1} is the corresponding label and N is the number of training samples, we train two models: p+(x|y = +1) for {x(i) subject to y(i) = +1} and p?(x|y = ?1) for {x subject to y = ?1}. Then, given an input x at test time we compute the ratio (derived from Bayes rule): r = p+(x|y = +1)/p?(x|y = ?1) ℅ p(y = +1)/p(y = ?1). If r > 1, then x is assigned to the positive class, otherwise to the negative class.
We have a few different choices of distribution we can choose from. The most common one is the n-gram, a count-based non-parametric method to compute p(x(i) k |x(i) k?1,x(i) k?2,...,x(i) k?N+1), where x(i) k is the k-th word in the i-th document. In order to compute the likelihood of a document, we use the Markov assumption and simply multiply the n-gram probabilities over all words in the document: p(x(i)) = QK k=1 p(x(i) k |x(i) k?1,x(i) k?2,...,x(i) k?N+1). As mentioned before, we train one n-gram language model using the positive documents and one model using the negative ones.
In our experiments, we used SRILM toolkit (Stolcke et al., 2002) to train the n-gram language models using modi?ed Kneser-Ney smoothing (Kneser & Ney, 1995). Furthermore, as both language models are trained on different datasets, there is a mismatch between vocabularies: some words can appear only in one of the training sets. This can be a problem during scoring, as the test data contain novel words that were not seen in at least one of the training datasets. To avoid this problem, it is needed to add penalty during scoring for each out of vocabulary word.
N-grams are a very simple data-driven way to build language models. However, they suffer from both data sparsity and large memory requirement. Since the number of word combinations grows exponentially with the length of the context, there is always little data to accurately estimate probabilities for higher order n-grams.
In contrast with N-grams languages models, Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Mikolov et al., 2010) are parametric models that can address these issues. The inner architecture of the RNNs gives them potentially in?nite context window, allowing them to perform smoother predictions. We know that in practice, the context window is limited due to exploding and vanishing gradients (Pascanu et al., 2012). Still, RNNs outperform signi?cantly n-grams and are the state of the art for statistical language modeling. A review of these techniques is beyond the scope of this short paper and we point the reader to (Mikolov, 2012) for a more in depth discussion on this topic.
Both when using n-grams and RNNs, we compute the probability of the test document belonging to the positive and negative class via Bayes＊ rule. These scores are then averaged in the ensemble with other models, as explained in Section 2.4.
2
Accepted as a workshop contribution at ICLR 2015
Table 1: Performance of SVM with Wang & Manning (2012) rescaling for different N-grams
Input features Accuracy Unigrams 88.61% Unigrams+Bigrams 91.56% Unigrams+Bigrams+Trigrams 91.87%
2.2 LINEAR CLASSIFICATION OF WEIGHTED N-GRAM FEATURES
Among purely discriminative methods, the most popular choice is a linear classi?er on top of a bagof-word representation of the document. The input representation is usually a tf-idf weighted word counts of the document. In order to preserve local ordering of the words, a better representation would consider also the position-independent n-gram counts of the document (bag-of-n-grams).
In our ensemble, we used a supervisedreweighingof the countsas in the Naive Bayes SupportVector Machine(NB-SVM) approach(Wang & Manning, 2012). This approachcomputesa log-ratiovector between the average word counts extracted from positive documents and the average word counts extracted from negative documents. The input to the logistic regression classi?er corresponds to the log-ratio vector multiplied by the binary pattern for each word in the document vector. Note that the logictic regression can be replaced by a linear SVM. Our implementation1 slightly improved the performance reported in (Wang & Manning, 2012) by adding tri-grams (improvement of +0.6%), as shown in Table 1.
2.3 SENTENCE VECTORS
Recently, (Le & Mikolov, 2014) proposed an unsupervised method to learn distributed representations of words and paragraphs. The key idea is to learn a compact representation of a word or paragraph by predicting nearby words in a ?xed context window. This captures co-occurence statistics and it learns embeddings of words and paragraphs that capture rich semantics. Synonym words and similar paragraphs often are surrounded by similar context, and therefore, they will be mapped into nearby feature vectors (and vice versa).
Such embeddings can then be used to represent a new document (for instance, by averaging the representations of the paragraphs that constitute the document) via a ?xed size feature vector. The authors then use such a document descriptor as input to a one hidden layer neural network for sentiment discrimination.
2.4 MODEL ENSEMBLE
In this work, we combine the log probability scores of the above mentioned models via linear interpolation. More formally, we de?ne the overall probability score as the weighted geometric mean of baseline models: p(y = +1|x) = Qpk(y = +1|x)汐k, with 汐k > 0.
We ?nd the best setting of weights via brute force grid search, quantizingthe coef?cient values in the interval [0,1] at increments of 0.1. The search is evaluated on a validation set to avoid over?tting. We do not focus on a smarter way to ?nd the 汐 since we consider only 3 models in our approach and we consider it out of the scope of this paper. Using more models would make the use of such method prohibitive. For a larger number of models, one might want to consider random search of the 汐 coef?cients or even Bayesian approaches as these techniques will give better running time performance.
3 RESULTS
In this section we report results on one of the largest publicly available sentiment analysis datasets, the IMDB dataset of movie reviews. The dataset consists of 50,000 movie reviews which are categorized as being either positive or negative. We use 25,000 reviews for training and the rest for
1https://github.com/mesnilgr/nbsvm
3
Accepted as a workshop contribution at ICLR 2015
Table 2: Performance of Individual Models Single Methods Accuracy N-gram 86.5% RNN-LM 86.6% Sentence Vectors 88.73% NB-SVM Trigram 91.87%
Table 3: Performance of Different Model Combinations Ensemble Accuracy RNN-LM + NB SVM Trigram 92.13% RNN-LM + Sentence Vectors 90.4% Sentence Vectors + NB-SVM Trigrams 92.39% All 92.57% State of the art 91.22%
testing, using the same protocol proposed by (Maas et al., 2011). All experimentscan be reproduced using the code available at https://github.com/mesnilgr/iclr15.
Table 2 reports the results of each individual model. We have found that generative models performed the worst, with RNNs slightly better than n-grams. The most competitive method is the method based on reweighed bag-of-words (Wang & Manning, 2012) 2. Favoring simplicity and reproducibility of our performance, all results reported in this paper were produced by a linear classi?er.
Finally, Table 3 reports the results of combining the previous models into an ensemble. When we interpolate the scores of RNN, sentence vectors and NB-SVM, we achieve a new state-of-the-art performance of 92.57%, to be compared to 91.22% reported by (Wang & Manning, 2012). Notice that our implementation of the Sentence Vectors method (Le & Mikolov, 2014) alone yielded only 88.73% (a difference of ? 4%). In order to measure the contribution of each model to the ?nal ensemble classi?er, we remove one model at a time from the ensemble. We observe that the removal of the generative modelaffects the least the ensemble performance. Overall, all three models contribute to the success of the overall ensemble, suggesting that these three models pick up complimentary features useful for discrimination. In Table 4, we show test reviews misclassi?ed by single models but classi?ed accurately by the ensemble.
4 CONCLUSION
We have proposed a very simple yet powerful ensemble system for sentiment analysis. We combine three rather complementary and conceptually different baseline models: one based on a generative approach (language models), one based on continuous representations of sentences and one based on a clever reweighing of tf-idf bag-of-word representation of the document. Each such model contributes to the success of the overall system, achieving the new state of the art performance on the challenging IMDB movie review dataset. Code to reproduce our experiments is available at: https://github.com/mesnilgr/iclr15. We hope researchers will take advantage of our code to include their new results into our ensemble and focus on improving the state of the art for Sentiment Analysis.
REFERENCES
Kneser, Reinhard and Ney, Hermann. Improved backing-off for m-gram language modeling. In Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 1995. ICASSP-95., 1995 International Conference on,
2In our experiments, to match the results from (Le & Mikolov, 2014), we followed the suggestion by Quoc Le to use hierarchical softmax instead of negative sampling. However, this produces the 92.6% accuracy result only when the training and test data are not shuf?ed. Thus, we consider this result to be invalid.
4
Accepted as a workshop contribution at ICLR 2015
Table 4: Reviews misclassi?ed by Single Models but classi?ed accurately by the Ensemble
Model Sentences (positive) a really realistic , sensible movie by ramgopal verma . no stupidity like NB-SVM songs as in other hindi movies . class acting by nana patekar . much similarities to real ＊encounters＊ . (negative) leslie nielson is a very talented actor , who made a huge mistake by doing this ?lm . it doesn＊t even come close to being funny . the best word to describe it is stupid ! (positive) this is a good ?lm . this is very funny . yet after this ?lm there RNN-LM were no good ernest ?lms ! (negative) a real hoot , unintentionally . sidney portier＊s character is so sweet and lovable you want to smack him . nothing about this movie rings true . and it＊s boring to boot . (positive) this movie is based on the novel island of dr . moreau by Sentence Vector version by john frankenheimer . (negative) if it wasn＊t for the terri?c music , i would not hesitate to give this cinematic underachievement 2/10 . but the music actually makes me like certain passages , and so i give it 5/10 .
volume 1, pp. 181每184. IEEE, 1995.
Le, Quoc V. and Mikolov, Tomas. Distributed representations of sentences and documents. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2014.
Maas, Andrew L., Daly, Raymond E., Pham, Peter T., Huang, Dan, Ng, Andrew Y., and Potts, Christopher. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2011.
Mikolov, Toma∩s’. Statistical language models based on neural networks. PhD thesis, 2012.
Mikolov, Tomas, Kara?a∩t, Martin, Burget, Lukas, Cernock`y, Jan, and Khudanpur, Sanjeev. Recurrent neural network based language model. In INTERSPEECH, pp. 1045每1048, 2010.
Pang, Bo and Lee, Lillian. Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Foundations and trends in information retrieval, 2(1-2):1每135, 2008.
Pascanu, Razvan, Mikolov, Tomas, and Bengio, Yoshua. On the dif?culty of training recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1211.5063, 2012.
Socher, Richard, Pennington,Jeffrey, Huang, Eric, Ng, Andrew, and Manning, Christopher D. Semisupervised recursive autoencoders for predicting sentiment distributions. Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2011.
Stolcke, Andreas et al. Srilm-an extensible language modeling toolkit. In INTERSPEECH, 2002.
Wang, Sida and Manning, Christopher D. Baselines and bigrams: Simple, good sentiment and topic classi?cation. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Short Papers-Volume 2, pp. 90每94. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2012.